# Structural and functional brain asymmetry in relation to heterogeneous causes of situs inversus totalis

Abstract
Various aspects of brain organization differ between the left and right hemispheres. Clues to the developmental origins of these asymmetries may be gained through associations with situs inversus totalis (SIT), a rare condition in which visceral organs are reversed on the left-right axis. In the largest previous brain imaging analyses of SIT (38 cases, 38 controls from Belgium), typical functional asymmetries such as left-hemisphere language dominance were mostly unaltered, but various aspects of asymmetrical cerebral structure - petalia, bending, and posterior venous anatomy – were often reversed in this condition. Some SIT cases arise from monogenic mutations, usually affecting motile cilia, which help to create the embryonic left-right body axis. However, most SIT cases do not have obvious genetic causes and may arise from environmental or random effects during embryogenesis. We sequenced the genomes of 23 SIT cases and 23 controls from the Belgian dataset and pooled with prior data from the remaining 15 cases and 15 controls. We aimed to discover whether altered brain asymmetries arise from mutations in ciliary genes, in other types of genes, or in genetically unsolved cases. In total, 19 cases had likely monogenic mutations affecting the function of motile cilia, while 19 cases remained genetically unsolved. Functional and structural brain asymmetries were not significantly different in genetically solved versus unsolved SIT cases. Therefore, functional brain asymmetries seem largely independent of known mechanisms of visceral situs formation, while structural brain torque is altered in SIT regardless of the presence or absence of overt genetic causes.
